# Chapter 31: Scaling Into and Out of a Trade
> Scaling into a trade simply means that you are entering again once you are already in a position, and scaling out means that when you exit, you exit only part of your position and look to exit the rest later. More traders are willing to scale out than are willing to scale in; in fact, many traders regularly scale out of trades. For example, if you exit part of your position for a scalp and then exit the balance for a swing, you are scaling out of your trade.
>
>
Scaling into a trade means that you are adding to your position. Institutions like mutual funds have to scale into and out of positions constantly because they receive new money and requests for redemptions every day. Individual traders commonly use scaling in when they enter in the direction of the trend during a pullback and when fading the extremes of a trading range, and when they dollar cost average. Scaling into a potential reversal is very risky; it is usually better to exit if the market goes against you and then look for a second entry.


You can scale in either as the trade moves against you or as it moves in your direction. If you scale in after you already have a profit, this is also referred to as adding to your position, or pressing your trade. For example, if the market is in a bull channel, bulls will add to their positions on every pullback as the market goes higher. The same is true of a strong bull spike. Many traders quickly add to their longs as the spike rapidly grows, bar after bar. Strong spikes always create brief opportunities when the trader's equation is exceptional, and some traders are adept at pressing their trades in these fast markets. Each additional purchase is usually at a higher price, and all of their earlier entries are profitable. Bears who are shorting in the bull channel as the market is going higher are scaling in above the highs of prior bars and adding on as the trade continues higher. Each earlier entry has a growing loss, but the bears expect that once the market reverses, they will have a net profit. I have a friend who is an expert at scaling into countertrend trades in channels in the Emini, looking for a reversal. He looks for the market to test the beginning of the channel, where he takes profits. For example, if the recent average range lately in the Emini has been about 10 to 15 points, and today has a spike and channel bull trend that has had a couple of pushes up and is not particularly strong, he would start to short on limit orders at the most recent swing high, and add to his position at the next one or two new highs in the channel, as long as each new entry was at least two points higher than the prior. Each of his one to three entries was for about 10 contracts. I chatted with him many times years ago as he took these trades, and the market never went much beyond his second or third entry before reversing and going his way, so the stop was never an issue in our conversation. However, I assume that it had to be at least a few points beyond his final entry. According to my math, I believe that he was willing to risk between $5,000 and $10,000 for his 30 contracts. I am telling this story not to advocate what he was doing, because very few people have the experience to trade like that. However, he is an interesting, real example of a trader who specializes in a particular type of scaling in and makes a living by doing it.


The key premise to scaling into a trade that is moving against you is that you believe that the market will soon turn in your direction and that you will be able to make a profit. You should never scale into a losing position unless you are confident about the big picture, and the best situation is when you believe that you are scaling into a growing pullback in a strong trend and with a clear always-in direction. Most traders never add to a losing position and instead let themselves get stopped out, and then look to re-enter if there is another signal. However, many traders feel that they can never be certain of the exact bottom or top of a trend or trading range, but are confident when the market is close to a reversal. Some of those traders take the reversal trade and use a wide stop. Others use a tight stop, and if the market goes against them, they get stopped out and then look for another entry. Scale in traders trade a much smaller position size initially and will add to their position if the market continues against them, as long as they believe that their premise remains valid. If the market goes their way immediately, many will look to build their position up to full size by pressing their bets. They were willing to scale in at either a better or worse price. For example, if they bought a reversal up from the bottom of a large trading range and were willing to scale in lower, but instead the market immediately goes their way, they might add to their position on pullbacks as the market continues to rally toward the top of the trading range. Other traders might trade half size, add the second half lower, and then look to exit the first half at breakeven on the reversal up, and swing the second half with a breakeven stop. If you are scaling into a losing position and you then decide that the big picture has changed and your premise is no longer valid, you must exit your trade and take your loss. Even if the market begins to turn your way, if you feel that your original target has become unrealistic, do not hold on and hope that your premise will once again become valid. You have to always trade the market that is in front of you and not the one that you want or the one that you had a few bars ago. The market changes with every tick, and if your original target is now unrealistic, look for a new target and get out there, even if that means that you will be taking a loss. For example, if you scaled into an always-in bull market and it then flipped to an always-in bear direction, you should exit and look for short trades instead of hoping that the always-in bull market will once again return. Hope is never a sound basis for holding a position, because the market is based on mathematics and not luck, fairness, emotion, karma, or religion.


“Never add to a losing position.” That is one of the most fundamental rules on Wall Street. However, it is misleading because institutions do it all the time and it is part of many profitable strategies. How can that possibly be? It is because the adage refers to countertrend trades and the institutions are scaling into with trend trades. Whenever an institution feels that the market has gone too far up or down, it sees value in doing the opposite. Because no one can regularly pick exact turning points, many institutions enter in pieces over the course of many bars. They do not care if some of the entry signals form when their earlier entries have an open loss. As long as they see value and have a large position to build, they will work to fill it at the best possible price, regardless of whether it is above or below their earlier entries. This is similar to dollar cost averaging for an individual investor. If an investor has some cash and wants to buy stock, he might use 10 percent of the cash to buy on the first of each of the next 10 months, regardless of whether the later entries are at a lower price. Dollar cost averaging is a successful approach and more often than not requires an investor to add to a losing position. However, this is far different from a trader who buys at the bottom of a strong bear spike, thinking that there has to be a bounce soon. When the market falls straight down for two more bars, he buys more, and then more again even lower, as he attempts to lower his average cost. Soon, he is hoping for any bounce up to near his average entry price so that he can get out at breakeven. Invariably, his position has become so large that he decides that he has to get out on the next bear trend bar. That bar is usually a large sell climax and he exits with a huge loss, many times greater than the original profit he was trying to make from his buy scalp, and his exit is at the bottom of the market just before a huge rally.


There is a sound mathematical basis for scaling into or out of a trade, but many traders do it simply because they discovered that it works and they don't care about the reasoning. Professional traders do it on daily and weekly charts all the time. It works for day traders as well. If you are taking swing trades intraday on stocks that you do not follow constantly throughout the day and you are experienced at reading price action and confident that your entry is near the start of a swing, you can use a wide protective stop and look to add on if the market continues against you. Your initial trade could be a half or a third of your usual position size, and you can look to scale in one or two times as the market goes against you.


Scaling into a trade is usually best in a growing pullback in an always-in market (a clear trend), at least on a higher time frame, and in fading the extremes of a trading range. A trader can scale:

Into longs on a small pullback from a strong bull spike (a pullback is a small countertrend channel).
Into shorts on a small pullback from a strong bear spike.
Into longs as a bear channel falls or into shorts as a bull channel rises.
Into longs as a pullback falls further (pullbacks are small trends and therefore are in channels) or into shorts as a bear rally rises. For example, if there is a steeply rising moving average, bulls will scale into longs on a pullback below the moving average.
At fixed intervals in pullbacks in any strong trend based on the size of the prior pullbacks and the recent average daily range.
Into longs or into shorts in a trading range.
Into a countertrend position during a breakout if a pullback to the breakout point is likely, like in a broad channel day, in a trending trading range day, or in a stairs pattern.

There are many ways to scale into or out of a position since there are so many variables, which include:

*The number of times that you will scale in.* You can scale in one time or many times.
*Sizes of your positions.* If you are allowing for the possibility of scaling in if the market goes against you, make sure to keep your initial positions small enough so that the risk on your final position is within your usual tolerance.
*The number of shares entered at each level.* Your first entry can be for 100 shares, the second can be for 200, and the third can be for 500 or any number. However, most traders scale in with the same number of shares each time.
*The prices of the different entries.* The steps don't have to be fixed, which means that you can scale into a long at 20 cents below the first entry and again at 30, 70, or any number of cents below that. Alternatively, you can enter at the first reversal signal and if the trend continues, you can scale in at the next reversal signal and maybe the one after that as well.
*The risk.* This is how far your protective stop is from your average entry price.
*The reward.* This is how far your profit-taking limit order is from your average entry price.
*The probability.* It is never known with certainty, and it varies with the amount of risk, reward, and average entry price. For example, the probability of making 30 cents while risking 30 cents is greater than the probability of making 30 cents while risking 20 cents but less than the probability of making 30 cents while risking 40 cents.

Scaling involves uncertainty, which is inherent in channels and trading ranges where two-sided trading is taking place. The trader is betting that a short-term move is ending and that a larger move is about to begin. This is true even in a trading range, like when a trader is scaling into longs during a bear leg in the belief that the bigger picture is that of a trading range and that the small bear leg will probably fail to convert the trading range into a bear trend. Any combination of the variables that results in the chance of winning times the potential reward being greater than the chance of losing times the risk is a valid strategy. You always know the risk and the potential reward because you set them when you place your protective stop and your profit-taking limit order. You never know the probability with certainty, but you usually know when it is 60 percent or greater; if you are uncertain, then assume that it is 50 percent.


Whenever you scale in against a trend, as a general rule you should exit if the market makes a second move against you. This means that if you are bottom picking in a bear trend and the market forms a low 2 short, especially if it is near the moving average and has a bear signal bar, you should exit your longs and even consider reversing to short. If you still believe that a bottom is near, you can look to begin to scale in again lower. Also, it is risky to scale in against a trend in the final hour or so of the day, because you will too often find yourself holding a large losing position that you will have to cover by the close. Time is against you. Finally, it is risky to scale in against any strong trend. For example, if you believe that the market is in a strong bear trend, then you must believe it will soon be lower. If you believe that it will soon be lower, then it is too early to begin to buy. When a trend is strong, the only type of scaling in that you should consider is adding to your with-trend position.


There is a mathematical basis for scaling into and out of positions, but that does not mean that scaling in or out is the wisest use of your money. For example, suppose you believe that the chance that a stock now trading at $20 will fall to zero is 1 percent or less so you then buy 100 shares of a stock; if you scale in at each $5 drop, you would buy 100 more shares at $15, 100 more at $10, and 100 more at $5.00. You would then be long 400 shares with an average price of $12.50. Yes, the stock might not fall to zero, but you now need a 150 percent rally to get back to breakeven, and it is almost certain that you will make more money if you exit all of your shares at a loss and instead use the money to buy a stock that is in a strong uptrend.


Traders can also scale out of winning and losing trades. In that bull channel example, those bulls who were scaling into their longs as the bull channel went up would stop buying at some point and begin to take profits. If they took part of their trades off, they were scaling out of their trades. The bears might have decided that the reversal they were expecting would not be as strong as they originally thought and they might buy back some of the shorts that they just sold. If the market went another 10 ticks against them, they might buy back even more and look to short again higher. They were scaling out of their losing positions, although they might be planning to scale back in later.


One guideline that you can use to determine where to place your second entry is to think about how far away your protective stop would be if you were not scaling in. For example, if you were buying a pullback in a bull trend in Bank of America Corporation (BAC) and were thinking about using a 30 cent stop, you might instead buy more at that price and place a protective stop on your entire position 30 cents lower, or 60 cents below your first entry.


There are many ways to scale into a trade that is moving against you, and you can scale in any number of times. You can scale in at fixed intervals or at different support or resistance levels or at each subsequent reversal setup. You can make each subsequent entry the same size as the original or you can make them larger or smaller. The most important point is that if you are allowing for the possibility of scaling in, you have to have a plan at the outset. If you are not comfortable with creating a plan, do not scale into a losing position, even if you are buying a pullback in a strong bull trend or selling a bear rally in a strong bear trend. You must know where your final protective stop is and what your average entry price is, because you need to keep your total risk within your normal range. If you are not careful, you might find yourself holding your usual number of contracts but the stop is so far from your average entry price that your risk is several times greater than what you normally incur.


If traders are determined to try to scale into a trade, the least risky approach is to take a second entry if one appears while they are still in their trade and if their premise remains valid. For example, suppose they are long and the market goes sideways or a little down but not far enough to hit their protective stop, or a little up but not high enough to fill their profit-taking limit order; if the market creates another buy signal that has a good trader's equation, the traders can take that entry as well and treat their two entries as separate trades. They might have different stops and profit targets, but as long as each has a favorable trader's equation, the traders can treat them as separate trades and manage each based on its own characteristics. If a third good signal appears, they can buy again, but at some point their position becomes too complicated to be worth the effort. Since it is less stressful to just manage one trade at a time, most traders should not scale in, even if the subsequent signals look good.


*📊 **Figure 31.1** Scaling In Is Not for Most Traders*


> A beginning trader should not scale into trades because it can increase his risk to beyond his comfort level, and any mistake can result in a huge loss. However, an experienced trader might take a second or third entry on a pullback in a strong trend, or add to his position during each bar of a strong spike, like in the move up from bar 3 to bar 4.
>
>
Most traders saw the market shown in the chart in Figure 31.1 as strongly always-in long by the close of bar 4, which was a four-bar bull spike with very little overlap and big bodies. It followed earlier buying pressure on the open and again on the two-bar spike at bar 1. Bar 7 was a valid two-bar reversal and high 2 buy signal (where bar 5 was the high 1). Other traders saw bar 7 as a high 1 buy setup. The entry bar was the small doji bar after bar 7, and that constituted the breakout of the bull flag. The market then had a breakout pullback buy setup at bar 8, which was also a valid signal. Some traders saw it as a triangle with bars 6 and 7. The entry price was the same as that for the long above bar 7. Since the premise was still valid and bar 8 was even stronger evidence that the market was trying to go higher, a trader could have bought a second position on that signal. The two-bar rally from there was a five-tick failure and probably did not result in a fill of the profit-taking limit orders, but the bull trend was still intact and the protective stops were not hit. The move up, though, broke above another small bear trend line and was therefore another breakout of a bull flag. Bar 9 was the breakout pullback buy setup. Since the trend was still intact and this new setup also had a good trader's equation, the trader could buy a third position here and manage it as a separate trade, using the appropriate protective stop and profit target. The trader would have been able to scalp out of all three entries with a one-point profit on the bar 10 spike.


Bars 14, 15, and 16 provided a similar opportunity to scale into longs with three separate entries.


Bars 20, 21, 22, and 23 had four valid buy setups, and all four could have been exited with a one-point profit on the bar 24 bull spike.


*📊 **Figure 31.2** Scaling into Longs*


> As shown in Figure 31.2, the 5 minute SPY was in a strong bull trend, and bulls could have scaled into a long position during the bull spike from bar 9 to the bar before bar 14, or during the complex pullback from the bar 14 high. The chart on the right is a close-up of the one on the left, but only relevant bars of the pullback are labeled. Bulls could have bought the small wedge bull flag pullback to the moving average with the goal of taking profits at the old bull high (bar 14). They could have placed their buy stop at one tick above the bull inside bar that followed bar 18. Alternatively, they could have entered above the high of the two-bar reversal (the high of bar 18). If they bought 200 shares above the bull inside bar, they got long at $130.76. Their protective stop was one tick below the bar 18 low of $130.66, and they planned to take profits at a new high of the day on a limit order at $130.94, the high of bar 14. They were risking 11 cents to make 18 cents, and since this was a bull flag at the moving average, they probably had at least a 60 percent chance of success and a 40 percent chance of failure. In this case, they would have lost 11 cents when bar 20 fell below bar 18. Since they had bought 200 shares, they lost $22 plus commissions.
>
>
Other traders might have been equally confident that the trend was strong enough so that the pullback should be followed by a new high on the day, but they might have been concerned that the pullback to bar 18 was in a relatively tight channel. A channel is often just the first of two legs, and there was a reasonable risk that there might be a second leg sideways to down before the bull trend finally resumed. However, the trend was so strong that the market should not fall much below the moving average, if the trend was still good. Because of this uncertainty, the scale-in traders might have bought a half-size position above the bull inside bar after bar 18. Instead of stopping themselves out below bar 18, they might have bought the other half of their position there, 10 cents below their first entry. They could have then placed a stop on their entire position 11 cents lower, at twice the size of their initial protective stop. They would have been filled at $130.66 on bar 20, lowering their average entry price on their 200 shares to $130.71; the risk was then $130.55. They were risking 16 cents to make 23 cents, and since this was a bull flag, they had at least a 60 percent chance of success. The market reversed up strongly on the bar after bar 20, but quickly reversed down into a two-bar reversal. A beginner might have exited with a loss at that point, and might even have reversed to short. However, an experienced trader would never short at the bottom of a trading range in a bull trend and would have relied on a stop. The market reversed up again at bar 23 in a moving average gap bar buy setup and then worked higher to a new high on the day. The move up had several pullbacks, indicating that the bulls were not strong, and the market reversed down at the new high, where clearly many bulls, including the scale-in traders, took profits.


A bull who bought earlier in the day could have scaled out as the trend progressed. There were several reasonable chances to buy, like the high 1 setups at bars 2, 4, and 6. Let's say that a bull bought 400 shares at $130.10, one tick above bar 6, and placed a protective stop at one tick below at $129.96, risking 14 cents. There are many ways to take profits, and one popular one is at about twice the initial risk. The trader could have taken 100 shares off at 28 cents. This was during the spike up from bar 9 as it moved beyond bar 8. Other traders take partial profits at fixed intervals, like every 20 cents. A trader who did that would have exited on bar 8, which had a large tail on the top, indicating that many traders took partial profits there. Bulls should trail their protective stops at just below the most recent swing low, so this bull's stop was still below bar 6. Once the market moved above bar 8, the trader would have moved his stop to just below bar 9. He could have taken another 100 shares off at four times the initial risk, at $130.52, on the bull trend bar two bars before bar 12, as the market moved above bar 11. The bar 11 high was exactly $130.52, so many traders placed their limit orders at one tick below the obvious target. This is a type of failure and often leads to a bigger pullback, but here it led to a profit-taking tail at the top of the bar, and then only a small one-bar pause in the trend. The trader could have continued to exit 100 shares at another 72 and 96 cents above the entry (or at 60 and 80 cents’ profit), or could have exited the third 100 shares at the first sign that the market might have a larger pullback, like one tick below bar 14. He could then have looked to exit the final 100 shares before the close, maybe on a move to a new high of the day after the pullback. The final exit would have been on bar 27 at $130.94, 84 cents above the initial entry.


*📊 **Figure 31.3** Institutions Scale In as the Market Goes against Them*


> When institutions buy at the bottom of a trading range, they will then buy more on every little dip to defend their stops as they try to turn the market up.
>
>
As shown in Figure 31.3, today had a big gap down so the day was likely to trend up or down. Following bar 3, the market sold off strongly into a lower range, and by the time bar 6 formed, the day was a trending trading range day. It is usually safe to buy near the bottom of every range and short near the top.


Bar 5 broke above a steep trend line. Bars 4 and 6 were strong bull reversal bars, with bar 6 setting up a second entry long (a lower low pullback from the breakout above the micro channel). The entry bar was a bear trend bar, which is a sign of weakness. If the market traded one tick below its low, this would have been a failure and the market would likely have dropped quickly down in one or two more legs (one more could set up a small wedge bottom). Since the smart money traders believed that this was a trending trading range day and they bought the second entry, they would defend it by continuing to add to their longs by buying down to the low of the entry bar. They did not want the market to go one tick lower, because they would then have a losing trade. The market missed those protective stops by one tick many times over the next 15 minutes, and patient longs were rewarded.


The day could also be viewed as a trend from the open bear trend, a small pullback bear trend, or a trend resumption bear trend, where the trading range from 8:00 a.m. PST until 11:00 a.m. was sloping downward, which was a sign that the bears were strong.


*📊 **Figure 31.4** In Strong Bull Channels, Traders Scale In All the Way Up*


> When bulls are confident that the market is going higher and skeptical that there will soon be a pullback that would allow them to buy lower, they begin to buy at the market and keep buying all the way up. In Figure 31.4, Apple (AAPL) had a large gap up, then a pullback, and then a bull breakout at bar 6. The odds favored a bull trend day, and traders believed that even if there were a pullback, the market would soon reach a new high. Therefore, it made mathematical sense to begin buying at the market and on any tiny pullback, like maybe 10 cents. Traders and institutions continued to buy relentlessly but not with enough urgency or size to cause a huge bull trend bar and possible climactic reversal. They were scaling in all the way up to bar 10, because they believed that the first pullback would not go too far and it would be bought aggressively enough to push the market to a new high.
>
>
When the trend is this strong, you have to believe that the market will soon be higher. If you believe that it will soon be higher, it does not make sense to begin scaling into a short position, because if you wait, you can short at a better price. When a channel is strong, you should never scale in against the trend.


The market had about a $1.00 spike and channel bear pullback to the moving average at bar 13, where the bulls finally overwhelmed the bears. They pushed the market up to a nominal new high where even the traders who had bought at bar 10 could get out at breakeven. Many of those traders were momentum traders who keep buying until the trend changes, and they were happy to add on at the bar 13 first moving average gap bar. They then exited their longs from bar 10 at breakeven, and their longs from bar 13 with a 60 cent profit.


Bulls might also have scaled in on the sell-off down to bar 19, believing that the bull trend was so strong that the pullback should lead to a test of the high. Bar 18 was a strong bull reversal bar, and bulls might have bought above its high. Since the bear channel was steep, these bulls knew that the market might fall further, but they wanted to be sure that they caught at least some of what they thought would be a trend resumption. Because the pullback might not have been over, some would have bought only a half-size position and would have looked to add on maybe 50 cents lower. They would have been filled on the move down to bar 19. Others would simply have looked for another bottom attempt and then bought more above the signal bar, like above the bar 19 high. Bar 19 was a large two-legged sideways to down correction where bar 13 was the first leg, and it was about a measured move down from the bars 10 and 14 double top. Although they might scale out of some of their positions on the test of their first entry at the bar 18 high, most would have held for a larger profit. They might have taken half off on the pause bar after the bull spike up to bar 20 and then moved the protective stop to breakeven on the balance.


*📊 **Figure 31.5** Scaling into a Pullback*


> When the moving average is steeply up, traders will buy a pullback to the moving average and scale in lower. In the chart shown in Figure 31.5, traders who had limit orders to buy a touch of the moving average got filled on bar 9, but unfortunately for them, the market spiked down. Many traders would have scaled in lower because they were confident that the market would soon rally back up to the moving average, and it often rallies all the way back to their initial purchase. The bar 15 high was exactly the price where the bar 9 longs bought the pullback to the moving average. Why did the market turn down at bar 15? Because many traders who scaled into longs on the sell-off to bar 11 sold out of their longs around breakeven for their initial entry, which was where bar 9 touched the moving average. They made a profit on their lower entries and got out at breakeven on their first entry. Their goal was a profitable long based on a steeply rising moving average, and once they achieved their goal, they sold out of their longs and there was no one left to buy.
>
>
When there is a possible reversal, many traders don't buy the first touch of the moving average. Instead, they will start to buy below the moving average. For example, the traders who bought at bar 9 might have scaled into additional longs at each one point lower. Other traders might instead have begun buying at one, two, or even more points lower and then could have scaled in at each one-point drop from there for maybe two or three entries. They could have risked maybe half of the average range, or about five points below their first entry. For example, if they bought at 1,219 and again at 1,218, they could have exited both positions at their original price and made a point on their second entry and nothing on their first. If they were more aggressive, they could have taken profits at one point above their higher entry, at the moving average, or on the test of the bar 9 original moving average entry price.


*📊 **Figure 31.6** Scaling In during Spikes*


> Traders can enter or scale in during the spike phases of trends. As shown in Figure 31.6, today opened with a large gap up, but the first two bars were dojis, indicating that there was uncertainty about the high open. The bulls were not buying aggressively. They bought at the bottom of the two bars, creating tails, but if the market were to turn down, the bulls would have stopped buying if their two attempts failed. The strong bar 2 bear trend bar convinced the bulls that the market was going down. Traders shorted into its close, and the bulls exited on its close and on a stop below the first bar of the day. Once there was a strong bear bar on the next bar, bears were confident that a spike was underway and that there would be at least a measured move down. They shorted the close of bar 3. Since two-bar spikes are common in the first 30 minutes and are often followed by pullbacks, some bears would have kept their protective stops above bar 2 to allow for a possible lower high. Other bears saw bar 3 as such a strong bear trend bar and an entry bar (for traders who shorted below the bar 2 signal bar) that they would have put their stops above bar 3.
>
>
The next bar was a strong bull reversal bar, but since a lower high was likely after two strong bear trend bars, most traders would have held short. The market went one tick above the bar, trapping weak bears out and weak bulls in, and then reversed down at bar 4.


Some traders would have shorted on a stop below bar 4 and would have entered two bars later. The doji close of the entry bar would have made them nervous, but then the bear spike began.


Bar 5 had a strong bear body, so some traders would have shorted its close, and others would have shorted below its low.


Bar 6 was the second bar in the spike and had a large bear body. At this point, many traders saw it as a breakout from the opening range. The bulls finally gave up and the bears became very confident that the day's range would expand to the downside to reach around the average daily range of recent days. Traders shorted its close. Aggressive traders would have kept shorting closes until there was a bar with a large tail or a bull body. Even when one forms, it is the first pause or pullback and the market will usually go down again within a few bars so that the traders who had shorted the close of the bar before will still be able to make a scalper's profit. Once the pause bar forms after a spike of several bars, most traders stop entering on the close.


The market rallied to bar 16, and traders wondered if it might form a higher low and then have a second leg up. The bar 17 strong bear trend bar broke out below any possible bull flag and made traders think that a new low of the day was likely. Traders shorted its close and the close of the bar 18 follow-through bar. Bar 19 was a pause bar, so bears stopped shorting closes.


Bar 23 was a strong bull reversal bar and a two-bar reversal on the third push down of the day, and traders saw it as a possible wedge bottom or as a higher time frame wedge bull flag. Since its low was well above the low of yesterday, many traders saw the entire sell-off today as a bull flag. Some traders bought above its high, and other traders bought the close of the bar 25 entry bar. The market now had a two-bar bull spike after a good bottom, and traders knew it should have at least two legs up.


Bar 26 had another strong bull close, and traders bought the close.


Bar 28 had a large tail on the top, so traders stopped buying closes.


There was a wedge bull flag at bar 31, and the bulls assumed that this was the start of the second leg up.


The market broke below the bull channel from bar 31 to bar 35, and traders thought that the second leg up might have ended and the bear trend might be resuming. Some traders shorted the bar 36 close, but the market reversed up into a two-bar reversal at bar 37 and the bears would have exited. They would have thought that this was a bear trap and a false breakout of the bull channel, and they saw the market reversing up at a higher low (above bar 31) and wondered if the bull trend would resume.


Bulls bought above the two-bar reversal at bar 37 and again on the closes of bars 38 and 39. The next bar was a pause bar, so they stopped buying closes. The traders who bought on the close of bar 39 exited on the bar 41 bear bar. They bought for a scalp, and the market failed to go up on the next bar; it then failed again, so it was likely to go down.


So what do these spikes have to do with scale trading? Let's say that you are comfortable trading two contracts, scalping one for one point and swinging the other until the trend ends. If you took any of the early short entries on bars 2, 3, or 4, you would have scalped out one contract during bar 5. On the close of bar 5, you could put your scalp contract back and once again be short two contracts. You would have scalped one out during bar 8 and added it back on at the close of bar 8. Depending on where your first entry was, you might exit all on bar 12, or, if your original short was around bar 3, you might hold short with a breakeven stop.


As an alternative to adding just one contract on at the close of bar 5, you could short two more there and then be short three contracts, which is more than your usual risk, but put a breakeven stop on your first contract so that your total risk is the same as your usual total risk. You could repeat this again on the close of bar 7 and on the close of bar 8. At that point, your swing position would be four contracts, but you would have a breakeven stop on three. You would also have one scalp contract, so your total position size would be five contracts, but your total risk would be the same as you normally have when you trade two contracts.


You could use the same approach with the other spikes during the day. As long as you do not exceed your normal risk level that you would have on your usual two-contract size, there will be days when you can have five or more contracts on and make windfall profits.


*📊 **Figure 31.7** Scaling In during Channels*


> Traders will scale into countertrend positions when the market is forming channels, but this is reliable only as long as the day is not a strong trend day. In Figure 31.7, the move down to bar 2 was about half of an average range, so the upside breakout that began at bar 6 could have led to a measured move up and then an upper range, creating a trending trading range day. The market would then be likely to come back down to test the bar 1 or bar 5 breakout points. Traders who understood this were willing to short above the bar 9 high and scale in higher. They could have added to their shorts either above other swing highs, like above bar 9, or at fixed intervals, like one and two points higher. They were shorting near the top of the channel, which is the ideal location for shorts. They could have taken profits at the breakout test that occurred on the spike down to bar 21.
>
>
Bulls would have scaled in below the low of the prior bar after the strong spike up to bar 7. They would have bought below the inside bar after bar 7 and again below bars 9, 11, and maybe 13. Since bar 13 was the third push up in the channel, and channels often correct for at least 10 bars after three pushes, most bulls would have been taking profits at this point instead of scaling in. Also, just as they would have scaled in below bars on the way up, they would have taken partial or full profits above the highs of prior bars, above swing highs, and at the closes of strong bull trend bars. All of these would have been near the top of the channel, which is where bulls tend to exit and bears tend to enter.


Bulls saw the move up to bar 13 as a sign of strength, and therefore they might have been willing to scale in on the bear channel down to bar 22. They might have first bought above the bar 19 bull reversal bar and then they could have added on at the second signal above bar 22, as the market tried to form a double bottom with the bar 8 bottom of the bull channel. Alternatively, they could have scaled in at fixed intervals, like one and two points below their original long entry above bar 19. They could have scaled out part at their original entry there and taken the rest off on the bar 26 test of the bar 18 top of the channel, or they could have scaled out at fixed intervals, like part at breakeven and then more at one point and then two points higher.


*📊 **Figure 31.8** Entering Where Weak Traders Exit*


> The market often hits obvious protective stops to the tick and then reverses. If traders are just looking for a few major reversals a day, they have to be willing to use wider stops, because the market often hits round number protective stops located at two, three, four, or five points from the entry price to the tick and then reverses. If a trader shorted below bar 3 in Figure 31.8 and used a three-point stop, it would have been hit to the tick at the bar 9 high. However, if the trader was willing to scale in, he might have an order to short more exactly where the weak traders are getting stopped out. Because a three-point stop here was logical since it was the appropriate size for the recent price action and it was at a new high of the day, an astute trader looking to scale in would have placed a limit order to short more at 11 ticks above the first entry, one tick below the three-point stop.
>
>
A trader who bought the lower low at bar 13 or the second reversal up at bar 20 had the same experience with a three-point stop. It would have been hit to the tick. The alternative again was to scale in just shy of the obvious stop.


The initial trading range was about half of the size of an average day, so when traders saw the breakout down to bar 11, they knew that there was about a 60 percent chance or better that this would be a trending trading range day and that there would be a test of the bar 4 breakout point. Traders could have bought on limit orders at two, three, and four points below bar 4. They would have been filled on only their first order, and they could have exited with two points’ profit on the move up to bar 12, which went a few ticks above the bar 4 breakout point.


Traders who saw the trending channels recognized that every breakout to a new low was followed by a pullback above the old low. Because of this, they could have planned to scale in below each low. Bar 13 was five ticks below bar 11, so traders would assume that the next new low would extend about five ticks below bar 13. Sometimes the next breakout is a little less and the market converts into a shrinking stairs pattern. They could have placed a limit order to buy about three ticks below the bar 13 low and an order to scale in one point lower and then again one point below that. Their scale orders would not have been filled, and they would have been able to make a point or two on their first entry. If they had scaled in, they could have exited the entire position at the first entry price and taken a breakeven trade on that first entry and a one-point profit on the second entry. Alternatively, they could have held out for more and made a point or two on the first and two or three points on the second.


They could have repeated the process as the market fell below bar 15. They might or might not have been filled on their second entry since the bar 21 low was exactly at the limit price, eight ticks below the bar 15 low.


If traders thought that the trading range from bar 11 to bar 17 would hold, they might have been willing to scale in on the sell-off with a first entry around bar 18. However, once the low 2 formed after bar 20, it was better to exit and possibly reverse to short and then look to buy again lower.