# CHAPTER 7: Final Flags
> Once a trend ends, traders can look at the chart and see the final flag in the trend. Final flag reversals are common because every reversal follows some kind of flag and therefore is a type of final flag reversal. If a trader understands what makes a flag likely to be the last one before the trend reverses, he is in a position to anticipate and trade the trend reversal.
Here are several characteristics that are common in final flags:


- The flag occurs in a trend that has gone on for dozens of bars; therefore the trend traders might begin to take profits and the countertrend traders might become more aggressive. Both will believe that the trend is overdone and is therefore prone to have a larger two-legged correction and evolve into a larger trading range or even a reversal.
- The flag is mostly horizontal and has signs of strong two-sided trading, such as several trend bars in the opposite direction, bars with prominent tails, several reversals, and bars that overlap the previous bar by at least 50 percent. Part IV in book 2 on trading ranges gives more signs of two-sided trading.
A micro trend line breakout pullback is of a one-bar or micro final flag. For example, when there is a break above a bear micro trend line and the market reverses down, that one- or two-bar breakout often becomes the final bear flag in the micro bear trend. If the
sell-off fails within a bar or two and then the market reverses back up from a lower low, double bottom, or higher low, this last sell-off is the breakout pullback and the original small breakout becomes the final flag in the micro bear trend. If there is a reversal after breaking out of a final flag, but it only pulls back for a few bars and then the trend resumes, the pullback has become a breakout pullback in an ongoing trend instead of a reversal, and the final flag has failed to reverse the market.
- Final flags sometimes reverse briefly only to form a larger flag, which can break out or reverse. You will usually be able to make a scalper’s profit off the final flag reversal entry before the evolution takes place, and the evolved pattern will typically result in another signal in either direction.
- Sometimes there will be two consecutive horizontal flags with the second one being smaller, and the breakout from the second one can lead to a wedge reversal.
- If the final flag forms after a climax, the failed breakout may not exceed the prior trend extreme. For example, if there is a bear climax and then a horizontal trading range above the low, this could become a final flag with the breakout reversing up after either a higher low or a lower low.
- Sometimes a final flag can be only one or two bars long and develop after a strong spike that is composed of several unusually large trend bars (a potential exhaustive climax). The breakout from that small flag often reverses after a bar or two and usually results in a two-legged pullback that lasts for 10 bars or more. This is a tradable countertrend setup, but it does not reliably lead to a trend reversal. The strong momentum demonstrated by those large trend bars frequently is followed by a test of the trend extreme within 10 to 20 bars. The one-bar final flag can be any type of pause bar. For example, if the market just had two consecutive sell climaxes, and the next bar is a bull doji, even if its low is below the low of the sell climax, the doji can become the final flag in the bear trend. If the next bar or two is a large bear spike and then the market reverses up, the pause bar is a one-bar final flag.
- Tight trading ranges often become final flags. Any sideways trading has a magnetic pull. Since breakouts usually fail, the market usually gets drawn back into the range where both bulls and bears agree that there is value.
- Sometimes there is no breakout, and the final flag just grows into a new trend. This often happens as a reversal after consecutive climaxes.
- Traders see that the market is overdone and expect a correction soon, but think that the breakout will go far enough for one more scalp. They therefore enter on the breakout of the potential final flag, but are looking to exit soon after entering, rather than being willing to hold for a swing. With everyone looking to take small profits, the breakout quickly reverses.

When you look at any chart where there is a trend reversal, you see that the trend was made up of a series of spikes and pullbacks, which are flags. If you study the final flag in that trend, you will discover that it gave clues that the trend was about to end and become either a trading range or an opposite trend. The trading range can have protracted legs and appear to be a trend reversal, but usually becomes just a large pullback on a higher time frame chart. However, those legs are usually big enough for a profitable swing trade. Traders are not certain if the reversal will be a new trend or a large correction, and they trade both the same way. They take partial or full profits after the first or second leg and look to add on during a pullback. If there is a strong move in the direction of the original trend, they might hold on to their position for a test of the old trend’s extreme.


Every pullback has two-sided trading, but when the pullback is mostly horizontal, has many bars that largely overlap, has several reversals within the range, and has several bars with bodies in the direction opposite to the trend, then the two-sided trading is especially pronounced. The final flag can be a trading range of any size, including just a single bar, although it usually has at least five to 10 bars. The two-sided trading means that both the bulls and the bears agree that there is value at this level to initiate trades. The bears are shorting aggressively because they believe that the trading range will break to the downside, and the bulls are buying aggressively because they believe that the breakout will be to the upside. Whenever the price drifts to the top of the trading range or breaks out of the top of the range and runs for several bars, the bears see it as an even better value, and they short even more strongly. The bulls see the top of the range as a little expensive, and they buy less. This results in the bears being able to push the price back down. When it gets to the bottom of the range or has a downside breakout, the opposite happens and the bulls think that the value is even better, but the bears think that it is getting too low to short heavily. This makes the market work back up into the middle of the range. The same process takes place in all trading ranges, including bull and bear flags, and the result is that there is a magnetic effect in the middle of these trading ranges, and most breakout attempts do not go far before the market is pulled back into the trading range.


When one develops after a trend has gone on for a few dozen bars, it often becomes the final flag in the trend. After the breakout, the with-trend traders are more interested in taking profits and waiting for a deep correction before entering again, and the countertrend traders will fade the attempt at trend resumption since they expect at least a two-legged correction. For example, if there is a bull trend that has been going on for dozens of bars and it might be ready for a larger correction or even a reversal, traders will watch to see if it forms a bull flag that is mostly horizontal. Since the bull trend is still in effect, traders are willing to buy the breakout, but are looking for only a scalp, not a swing. The bears who were shorting during the flag will buy back their shorts. Their buying contributes to the move up, but they are eager to short again once the market reaches some resistance level, which might be a fixed number of ticks where they think the bulls will scalp out of longs or might be some measured move target. The bulls quickly sell out of their longs for a small profit soon after entering. Aggressive bears see the same thing as the bulls and begin to sell exactly where the bulls are selling. With the bulls and the bears both expecting lower prices, there is no one left to buy and the market reverses down, at least for a scalp. If the move down is strong, the bulls will not be willing to buy and the bears will not be eager to take profits until there are signs that the correction is ending. The reversal can lead to a pullback, a larger correction (like a trading range), or a trend reversal.


As was discussed earlier in Chapter 3 about double bottoms and tops, final flags are caused by the same basic behavior. For example, if there is a potential final flag in a bull trend, there is a push up just before the flag forms. The upside breakout of the flag is a test of that bull high. If more sellers than buyers come in as the market tests up, the market will reverse down from this second push up. Although the underlying force is the same, a final flag looks sufficiently different and has several distinctive properties that warrant its being classified as a separate pattern. The same is true of a final flag in a bear trend, which is just a pair of moves down and then a reversal up. The bear breakout of the final flag is the second move down and a test of the strength of the bear trend that paused to create the final flag.


Many bulls and bears will sell soon after the bull breakout of a bull flag, and if enough do, the market will begin to reverse. If a bear reversal setup develops, traders will become more confident that a bigger correction will follow; more bulls will sell out of their longs, and more bears will begin to short. If the reversal down triggers by moving one tick below the bear reversal bar, the market will get drawn back into that final flag. It may stop there, but the market usually forms at least a two-legged sideways to down correction and often a trend reversal. The trend reversal is more likely if there was a strong bear leg (a sign of selling pressure) in the flag, or earlier, that broke well below the bull trend line. If the original trend lasted for 50 to 100 bars, then the reversal will more likely evolve into a large flag rather than a trend in the opposite direction. Remember, trends have tremendous inertia and tend to resist all reversal attempts. However, each reversal tends to be larger than the one before, and eventually one will succeed in reversing the trend into an opposite trend.


Protracted climaxes often end after breakouts from brief final flags. For example, if there is a strong four-bar bull spike and if the bodies are large and the fourth one is unusually large, it will often lead to brief selling because traders will see the spike as a potential buy climax. Both the bulls and the bears wait for big bars like this. The bulls will use the strength as an opportunity to take partial profits at a very high price, and aggressive bears will sell to initiate short scalps. The result is often a pullback. However, since the bull spike was so strong, there will usually be strong buying at and below the low of the prior bar. The bulls are buying to reestablish their full long positions, and the bears are buying back their short scalps. The result is that the pullback only lasts from one to a few bars and becomes a high 1 or 2 buy setup. Bulls will buy above the high of the prior bar, and many will also buy if the market breaks above the top of the original bull spike.


Since the flag followed a strong bull spike that might have gone too far, too fast, many traders will treat the bull flag breakout as only a scalp. They will quickly take their scalper’s profit. Their profit taking, along with shorting by aggressive bears, can quickly turn the market back down after a one- or two-bar breakout of the bull flag. This brief breakout is often made of one or more strong bull trend bars, and therefore is another potential buy climax. If enough traders see this as consecutive buy climaxes (the original bull spike was the first), many will only look to buy again after a pullback forms that has at least two legs and lasts about 10 bars. Many will short, expecting the larger pullback. If the reversal down came at a significant resistance level, many traders will see the move up as simply a buy vacuum test of the resistance level and will be open to the possibility of a trend reversal. They will watch the strength of the move down. If it is slow and weak, traders will expect it to become a pullback and will look for the bull trend to resume before long. If it has many bear bodies, they will not be eager to buy, and the market then has to probe lower to find buyers. Sometimes the market will enter a bear trend, and this can happen even if the original bull spike was very strong and the final flag was only a single bar. Many reversals happen after a second push, which essentially forms a double top. The two tops are often at different prices and form either a higher high or a lower high, but together behave like a double top and should always be considered to be different manifestations of the same price action.


When the market is in a strong spike and it then has a bar with a tail or opposite body, traders often expect one small final push and then a pullback. For example, if there is a strong bear spike with four consecutive large bear trend bars mostly closing near their lows, many traders will short around the close of each bar. If the next bar has a big tail on the bottom or a bull body, the bear trend is intact, but traders believe that a pullback is imminent. Many will short the close of this bar, but will hold only for a scalp, expecting the trade to be the final scalp in the spike. Because they see this as the final scalp, they will then not look to sell again until there is at least a small pullback. With no one willing to continue to sell at the bottom of the spike, the market will move up in search of a price that is high enough for the bears to once again short. Aggressive bulls know this and will buy at the bottom of the spike exactly where they think that the bears will be buying back their final short scalp. With both the bulls and the bears buying, the market moves up. The move up is usually at least enough for the bulls to scalp out of their longs, but it might last for five to 10 bars. Since it is the first pullback in a strong bear spike, there will be sellers above. Both the bulls and the bears will sell as the market moves above the high of the prior bar, and for any other small reason, because both are confident that the probability that the pullback will be brief is high. The selling by both the bulls and the bears results in at least one more push down, and the move down might even become a channel that reaches a measured move, based on the height of the spike. At the other extreme of possibilities, it also might be only a final flag breakout that leads to a reversal up. So how is that five-bar bear spike related to final flags? That tail or bull bar at the bottom of the spike told traders that there would be one more push down before a pullback and that it would go far enough down for a scalp, but that the market would likely reverse up quickly. This means that they saw the tail or the bull body as a micro final flag, and it was certainly a final flag on a smaller time frame chart. Traders don’t have to look at smaller time frame charts to verify this, because they know that it has to be the case, or else that tail or bull body would not have formed.


A final bull flag has three ways to break out. First, the breakout can be strong enough to go above the old high of the bull trend and then the market reverses down in a higher high reversal. Alternatively, the breakout can be weaker, and the market can reverse down below the prior high in the form of a lower high reversal. Finally, there might not be much of a breakout at all, or even no upside breakout. For example, the bull flag might form a high 2 or a high 3 buy signal, but the entry bar reverses down after going only a tick or two above the signal bar, or it could simply break to the downside without ever going above the high of the prior bar. If there is a downside breakout of the bull flag, the breakout is usually a spike that is then followed by a bear channel that extends for some type of measured move. If there is no clear breakout and the bull flag just keeps growing into a larger bear channel, at some point traders will give up on the bull flag premise and see the channel as a bear trend. When this happens, there will usually have been at least a one-bar bear spike at the start. When that bear trend bar formed, experienced traders would have wondered if it was strong enough to lead to a bear channel, and many would have been shorting above the highs of the previous bars, just in case a bear trend developed. The bull flag, even though it never broke out to the upside, was the final flag in the bull trend.


With any bull flag, pullback traders buy and look to exit on a test of the trend’s extreme (the most recent high). They prefer to take profits above the old high, but watch carefully to see if the market stalls below it. If so, they quickly take profits and will buy again only if there is another pullback. Their selling, and their unwillingness to buy for at least a couple more bars while they wait for a pullback, results in a lower high instead of a higher high. Because scalpers usually take profits at and just above the prior high, most new highs in bull trends find profit takers instead of new buyers. This results in most new highs being followed by pullbacks instead of protracted breakouts and new legs up. However, since most reversal attempts fail, most new highs do not result in reversals into bear trends. The reversal often looks strong, but is usually followed by just another bull flag. Bulls will buy the pullback and bears will take profits on their short scalps, and the market will test the high again. Eventually, one will be the final bull flag and it will be followed by a bigger correction or a reversal, and if there are signs that this will happen, experienced traders will go short.


Similarly, the final flag in a bear trend can also break out to the downside and reverse up from a lower low or a higher low, or it can simply break out to the upside without ever breaking out to the downside. There can be a failed low 2 or low 3 short and then a reversal up in the form of a large bull trend bar. This bull spike becomes the beginning of a new bull swing, and the bear flag will then be seen as the final flag in the bear trend, even though it never had a downside breakout. The bull breakout is the sign that the traders believe that the always-in trade has flipped from short to long.


If there are reasons to believe that a bear swing might be ending and it then begins to form a bear flag, traders might think that the low 1 or low 2 short entries from that bear flag will fail. If they are expecting no significant bear breakout from this bear flag and instead think that the market will trap bears and then break out to the upside, they can fade the low 1 and low 2 setups. For example, if there is a wedge bottom on a trading range day that is beginning to reverse up, traders will expect the low of the wedge to hold. Since they believe that the trend might now be up, they want to buy pullbacks. A pullback can be as small as a single bar. Since there will probably be two legs up, the first leg down should not go far. That low 1 short should fail and become a small higher low pullback in the new bull leg, and these bulls will expect at least a two-legged rally that will last 10 or more bars. The only time that a low 1 short is reliable is in the spike phase of a strong bear trend, and never after a reversal pattern. That low 1 short entry will likely fail to fall below the low of the wedge and will instead form a small higher low in the two-legged correction up. Because of that, traders will place a limit order to buy at the low or one to three ticks below the low of that short signal bar, expecting a small higher low to form instead of a profitable low 1 short. In the Emini, they usually can risk as few as four ticks.


As the reversal up continues, they might think that a low 2 short setup could form. However, since they believe that the trend has reversed into a bull trend, they expect that low 2 to fail as well and be followed by higher prices. They are still in the buy pullbacks mode, and that can include a small pullback like a low 2. Here again, they will place limit orders to buy at or below the low of the low 2 signal bar and risk about four ticks in the Emini. They are expecting this bear flag to fail to break out for more than a few ticks, and instead they look for the market to continue to work up into a bull channel. This is a type of final bear flag because it is the final flag of the bear trend. The bears thought of it as a bear flag, but were able to break it below the bear signal bar by only a tick or two, and then the flag continued to grow up and to the right until traders realized that it was now a bull channel. At some point, when enough traders realize what is happening, the bears cover, and there will usually be an upside breakout and then a measured move up.


Once the bears believe either that the market has reached the top of a trading range or that the bull trend is in the process of reversing down, they will look for high 1 and high 2 signal bars and place limit orders to short at or just above the highs of those bars. They are looking to sell rallies, even very small ones like a high 1 or a high 2. Bulls will look to buy low 1 and low 2 entries at the bottom of a trading range and at the bottom of a bear trend when they feel that the market is in the process of reversing into a bull swing.


If the high 2 is likely to fail, why would it ever trigger in the first place? It triggers because the bears are looking to short above bars, and less so just below the highs of bars. They place limit orders to short at and above the high of the prior bar. With a relative lack of bears willing to short just below the high of the bar, the bulls are unopposed and are able to push the market above the high of the prior bar, hoping that lots of bulls will enter on buy stops. The high of the bar acts as a magnet, and the push above the bar is a micro buy vacuum. The bulls find that there is an overwhelming number of bears waiting to short there, and there are lots of bulls, who bought lower, taking profits there. The result is that the high 2 triggers, but the market immediately turns down. Those bulls who bought over the last several ticks quickly see the lack of a rally above the high of the prior bar. Because the market is not doing what they expected, they exit and will not look to buy again for at least a few bars. Their selling out of their longs contributes to the sell-off.


If a final flag reversal triggers but the reversal fails within a couple of bars, this becomes a *failed* final flag. A failed final flag is a setup for a resumption of the original trend and therefore is a breakout pullback. After the market broke out of the potential final flag, it tried to reverse, but instead just pulled back a little and then the trend resumed instead of reversed. For example, if the market was in a bull trend and had a potential final bull flag that broke to the upside and then began to reverse down, but the short entry bar quickly became a strong bull reversal bar, this is a setup for a breakout pullback long. That bull reversal bar was a pullback from the breakout of the potential final flag, and if the bull trend goes far enough, it will be beyond the magnetic pull of the final flag and traders will look for other patterns. If the rally goes for only a bar or two and reverses down again, it sets up a second entry short from the original potential final flag. If the reversal succeeds, it is a final flag reversal. If it fails and the market again turns up, the market is likely in a bull channel, and channels can last for many bars.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.1** Final Flag Reversal*


> A sell climax that forms after a bear trend has gone on for a long time is often followed by a final flag reversal and at least a two-legged rally. In Figure 7.1, bar 1 ended two legs down from the open and was therefore a possible low of the day. It broke out of a sideways bear flag after a protracted move, so this could have been a final flag and it could have led to a reversal up. Bar 1 was a good reversal bar, triggering the final flag long, causing traders to expect at least two legs up. Some of the best reversals come when the first leg up from the reversal extends beyond the final flag, as it does here. There is then often a sideways flag above the old bear flag, and then the new bull trend continues. Sometimes there is just a brief pullback into the old bear flag and other times there is not even a pause in the new bull leg as it soars higher in a strong spike made of a series of bull trend bars. When you see this type of reversal, it is important to swing some or all of your position because the odds are good that you could receive windfall profits.
The trading range from about 7:30 to about 9:30 a.m. PST had two hours of two-sided, horizontal trading and was a larger final flag. Two-sided trading exerts a magnetic pull that tends to draw the market back to that level after a breakout.


The entry bar after bar 1 closed above the highs of the prior six bars and above the prior seven closes, and therefore reversed many highs and closes. Traders who shorted during those bars either had to cover their shorts or were holding losing positions, which they would soon likely cover with a loss. Also, they would not have been looking to short again for at least several bars, and most would have waited for at least a two-legged rally before considering shorting again. This made the market one-sided, which usually leads to a rally that has at least 10 bars and two legs.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.2** Tight Trading Range as a Final Flag*


> A tight trading range after a rally often becomes the final bull flag. In Figure 7.2, the bar 4 breakout above the open was on strength, and led to the formation of a tight trading range. Here, the strong breakout of the flag ended at bar 7, which was a two-legged move up (bar 5 was the first leg), and a wedge top (the first bar of the day was the first push up and bar 4 was the second). Two-legged moves out of flags often set up a major reversal that typically has at least two legs. The move down to bar 10 was in two legs, but it had only a single countertrend bar (bar 9), which meant that it was likely going to be just the first leg of two larger legs. When the two-legged move is in a tight channel, the entire channel usually becomes the first leg. In any case, if short traders were unsure, they could have moved their stops to breakeven after the move down to bar 10 at the moving average.
Bar 9 went above the high of the small bull doji bar to trigger a high 1 buy, but experienced traders expected it to fail after a buy climax and a final flag top. Bar 8 and the two bars that followed became a smaller final flag, with bar 9 being a lower high failed breakout of the three-bar final flag. There was a micro buy vacuum that sucked the market to a tick or two above that high 1 signal bar. Strong bears expected the high 1 to fail and were waiting to see if they would get an opportunity to short at or above the signal bar’s high. Many therefore stopped shorting when the market was a tick or two below the high of the bar, and this absence of traders willing to sell sucked the market higher in search of bears. Once the market reached their target (at and just above the high 1 signal bar), the bears aggressively shorted and overwhelmed the bulls, driving the market down. The bulls who bought at and just above the high 1 signal bar’s high immediately saw that the market stalled and was reversing, so they sold out of their longs, helping to push the market down. They became convinced that the short-term top was in and would not consider buying again for at least several bars. With no buyers left, the market fell quickly to the support of the moving average and the middle of the final flag (the trading range that began at bar 4), where bears would buy back some of their shorts and bulls would start buying again. Since the sell-off was strong, there were very few buyers, and the market was unable to rally. These buyers quickly became sellers (the bulls sold out of their new longs and the bears shorted once again), and the market fell further in search of a price that was low enough to attract buyers.


Bar 10 and the bar after it formed a two-bar reversal high 2 buy signal at the moving average. Experienced traders would not have bought this high 2 because it followed four strong bear bars (a micro channel). Bar 11 was the signal bar for the failed breakout of the high 2 bull flag. This is a common situation. Some bulls saw the pullback from the bar 7 high to the moving average as a bull flag. However, once the market broke below bar 10, the bulls gave up on that notion and decided that the market was likely to drop for about a measured move and two legs before forming another buy setup. The two-bar bear spike (bar 11 and the next bar) was followed by a bear channel. In hindsight, the bar 4 trading range turned into a final flag in the bull move up from bar 1, but smart traders would have anticipated this possibility and swung part of their shorts. The bar before bar 9 was also a final bull flag, as was the high 2 that triggered two bars after bar 10.


The low 2 lower high at bar 2 was a similar situation. The bears saw it as a bear flag in the sell-off from the open, a possible lower high and start of a bear trend, and at least the top of a possible trading range. Once the short triggered and then the market rallied above the high of bar 2, the bears knew that their premise was wrong. The bear flag failed and the bears expected a rally that would last at least two legs and reach about a measured move up.


Bar 7 was also the third push up on the day where the first bar of the day was a gap spike up, and bar 4 was the second push in the wedge channel that ended at bar 7.


As bar 9 went above the bull bar before it, the market was attempting to create a failed final flag, which is a breakout pullback buy setup. However, since the signal bar for this potential long and two of the prior three bars had prominent tails, shorts would have kept their protective stops above the bar 8 signal bar high until the market move down. Once the strong bar 9 bear trend bar closed, they would have moved their stops to above its high. This was a weak high 1 buy setup and likely to fail, and therefore it was not a buy setup. Most traders would have shorted at or above its high, which clearly happened here. They would not have gone long and they would not have exited their shorts.


Bar 12 is an example of a micro final flag. Traders were shorting the closes of the bear bars in the spike down, but the bar before bar 12 had large tails. This alerted traders to the possibility that a small pullback was imminent. Aggressive bears shorted the close of that bar, but were expecting only a scalp and then a pullback. They bought back their profitable scalps on the bar after entry, and their buying created the bar 12 reversal bar. Aggressive bulls understood what was going on, so they bought where they thought that the bears would be buying back their short scalps. The bulls were looking for only a scalp up. Bear swing traders also expected the pullback, so they bought back part of their positions to take profits. All traders with large open profits take partial profits along the way, and they usually do so where they expect a small pullback to form. Their buying contributes to the pullback. When the bulls sold out of their long scalps and the bears shorted at the top of the pullback, the market sold off again, as expected. V bottoms are rare, so everyone was eager to sell, knowing that the probability of at least one more push down was high. Traders sold above the high of the prior bar on limit orders and on stops below the low of the prior bar. There were also reasons to sell on every other time frame and every other type of chart. Other traders shorted the low 2 that triggered four bars after bar 12 (some shorted below the bull bar, while others shorted below the two-bar bear reversal). Early bulls who were unrealistically hoping for a bigger rally sold out of their longs on the low 2 and were not willing to buy again for at least a couple more bars down. With no one looking to buy, the market quickly fell for several bars.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.3** Triangle as a Final Flag*


> When the bullish momentum is exceptionally strong, it is better to look only for buy setups and not shorts until after there has been some significant sign of strength by the bears.
As shown in Figure 7.3, the Euro/U.S. Dollar Forex had a final flag short setup at bar 2, but the upward momentum was strong and the flag was only four bars long; it therefore did not break a significant bull trend line. That single bear trend bar was not strong enough to negate that much upward momentum, and it was likely that the market would correct sideways and then rally to a new high. This was likely to fail to reverse the market and instead become just a pullback from the breakout above the bar 1 two-bar reversal. When a final flag setup fails to reverse the market, it becomes a failed final flag, which is a breakout pullback setup. This is what happened here. The bar 1 potential final flag had a reversal signal at the bar 2 two-bar reversal. The reversal entry triggered, but the market did not fall far. Instead, it went sideways and formed another buy setup, and this made buying above bar 3 an entry from a failed final flag setup. The market broke above the bar 1 flag, pulled back, and then broke to the upside again.


The bar 3 two-bar reversal set up a high 2 long and a double bottom with bar 1, and these are reasons enough to buy in a strong bull trend. Conservative traders saw bar 3 as part of a small channel down from bar 2, and they would have bought above the small double top bear flag formed by the bars just before and after the bar 3 two-bar bull reversal. The breakout above bar 3 was weak and the market pulled back to a small higher low. This was a breakout pullback setup, and it turned the pattern into a wedge bull flag where bars 1 and 3 were the first two pushes down, as well as into a triangle (as soon as there was a third push down, the trading range was a triangle). The triangle was horizontal, and it formed after a protracted rally. It could have enough two-sided trading to generate sufficient magnetic pull to draw any breakout back into the trading range. Some traders saw bar 4 as a breakout pullback from the bar 3 bull trend bar and the high 2 entry on the next bar. This bull flag was a potential final flag, and bar 5 was the reversal setup. It was the third push up and a breakout of a one-bar pullback, which was a one-bar final flag. However, the momentum up was still so strong that a sideways correction was more likely than a reversal. The market entered a tight trading range from which it then could have broken out to the upside again or reversed down. If it broke to the upside, the tight trading range could have become the final flag.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.4** Final Flag, Then a Lower High*


> Sometimes a final flag breakout reverses at a lower high instead a higher high. In Figure 7.4, the rally up to bar 2 was strong and parabolic and therefore was likely to be followed by at least a two-legged pullback (pullbacks in a bull trend can be sideways or down) that would last at least 10 bars. It formed a horizontal trading range above the moving average from which it broke out at bar 3. However, the breakout failed and the market reversed down in a two-bar reversal. The bar 3 breakout was a lower high instead of a higher high, but it was still the final flag in the bull trend. Traders would have shorted below the two-bar reversal. Bar 3 was also a double top bear flag with the small lower high that followed bar 2. Bar 2 failed to go above the high of the open, and bar 3 was a second failed attempt to break out to a new high of the day. When the market tries to do something twice and fails both times, it usually trends in the opposite direction.
There was a huge two-bar sell spike on the open and then a bull bar. Any trend bar or series of trend bars forms a breakout, a spike, a gap, and a climax. This initial sell climax was followed by a second one at bar 1. Consecutive sell climaxes often lead to protracted corrections and sometimes reversals, as occurred here. The final flag in the sell-off down to bar 1 was that one-bar pause that formed just before bar 1. This bar became a one-bar final flag in the sell-off; even though it was a bull reversal bar and its low was below the low of the huge two-bar bear spike before it, it was a pause in the bear trend, and therefore a bear flag. Consecutive sell climaxes in a freely falling market like this often have a one- or two-bar final flag that is followed by a large correction or even a reversal. Traders who knew that consecutive sell climaxes usually lead to big pullbacks were willing to buy the reversal up at the low of the day after they saw that one-bar pause. There was no one left who would sell at the low. The remaining bears would have sold only a pullback and only after at least a 10-bar rally. Bar 1 interrupted the selling and turned it into two separate sell climaxes instead of a single climax. Had it not been there, the selling would have probably continued after bar 1, at least for a bar or two. Many bears would have bought back their shorts on the close of bar 1, expecting a rally to a level where they would consider shorting again. Aggressive bulls would have gone long at the close of bar 1, risking about as many ticks as bar 1 was tall, looking for a test of the bar 1 high and then possibly a measured move up, based on the height of bar 1. Bar 1 had 93,000 contracts, which was about 10 times the average volume of quiet bars over the past couple of days, and was therefore supportive of a spike and climax type of reversal up. Spike and climax variations of spike and channel trends are discussed in book 1. There is a spike down, a pause, and then another sell climax (bar 1), which acts like a one-bar channel in a spike and channel pattern.


The horizontal trading range after bar 1 was also a final flag, although it never broke out to the downside. After a sell climax, the market often forms a bear flag that can be horizontal or in a bull channel, and sometimes it will have a low 1 or a low 2 short setup as it did here, but there is no follow-through and therefore no bear breakout. Instead, the bear flag broke out to the upside, which is a common way for trends to reverse. The doji signal bars were weak signal bars for shorts after consecutive sell climaxes, and aggressive traders would have bought at or below their lows. Since it was the last bear flag, it was a type of final flag. It was also a reversal up from a one-bar final flag, which was the bull reversal bar before the large bar 1 sell climax. The bull trend bar breakout above the bear flag at 8:05 a.m. PST completed the reversal.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.5** Final Flags Sometimes Reverse without First Breaking Out*


> Sometimes the final flag does not break out and instead just continues to pull back, eventually becoming a trend in the opposite direction. As shown in Figure 7.5, there was a spike and climax down to bar 14, and bar 14 was a strong bull reversal bar. Some traders saw the spike as starting at bar 6 and ending at bar 9, while others thought that bar 9 and the bear bar before it formed the important spike, or that the two-bar spike that formed two bars after bar 10 was important. All of the bear spikes were important signs of selling pressure, and it does not matter which might have been the spike that mostly contributed to the climactic sell-off to bar 14 (a spike and climax type of spike and channel bear trend). There were then three pushes down in a parabolic move to bar 14 (bars 9 and 11 were the first two legs). This often leads to a protracted rally, but the rally usually begins as a bull channel, as it did here. A bull channel is a bear flag.
Bar 15 was a low 1, and smart traders would have expected that short to fail. In fact, they would have expected the low 2 to fail and a wedge bear flag to fail, and, as with all channels, they would have been buying at or below the low of the prior bar. Institutions would not be selling below the lows of bars in a channel, because that is not what they do. How can I be sure? Because if they did, the market would go down, but since it is going up, they must be buying. At some point, everyone realized that this bear flag was never going to break to the downside and the bears eventually bought back their shorts, some after the failed low 2 and others after the failed wedge bear flag. The result was an upside break, which happened here at the bar 19 bull trend bar and again above bar 20.


The bulls saw bars 3, 9, and 11 as forming a wedge bull flag, and when the market fell below bar 11, the wedge failed and the market collapsed. The bear breakout had only one leg because the pattern evolved into a spike and climax bottom.


The four consecutive bull trend bars that started at bar 14 showed buying pressure. The fourth was a breakout above a failed low 1. Bar 17 was a low 2 or low 3 setup, and instead of triggering a short, the market broke to the upside two bars later. Bar 18 was a wedge bear flag setup that triggered by one tick, and then the market reversed up and broke out to the upside on bar 19. Bar 20 was a reversal up from a moving average gap bar short, and it began a spike consisting of three bull trend bars. Unlike the earlier bull breakouts in the growing bear flag, this one had follow-through in the form of consecutive bull trend bars. This convinced most traders that the market was now always-in long, and they were no longer looking for a breakout of a bear flag.


Bar 12 was the start of a bull flag, following the strong move up from the bar 11 low. The bear bar before bar 12 was the first push down, and the two bear bars after bar 12 formed a second push down, setting up a possible high 2 bull flag that could have led to a second leg up. The next bar was a bull bar and therefore a two-bar reversal buy signal, but instead of breaking to the upside for a second leg up, the market broke to the downside with a strong bear trend bar. That bar made the bulls give up on their premise, and they then would not look to buy again for at least several more bars. Bar 13 was a pullback from the bear breakout of the bull flag and it was the start of a plunge down to the bar 14 parabolic wedge reversal (bars 9, 11, and 14 were the three pushes down).


When a bear flag breaks to the upside, like on bar 19, the bulls need a bull trend bar that closes at least several ticks above the top of the flag to make the bears give up on their premise that the rally is only a pullback in a bear. Similarly, when a bull flag breaks out to the downside, traders want to see a strong bear trend bar with a close that is several ticks below the bottom of the flag, like the bear trend bar that formed two bars before bar 13. Traders saw the high 2 bull flag setting up, but one that bear trend bar closed well below the flag, traders assumed that the bull premise was no longer valid and that the market would likely trade down for at least a couple of small legs.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.6** Bear Breakout of a Bull Final Flag*


> Sometimes traders want to buy a bull flag, but a buy setup never triggers and the market instead breaks to the downside. As shown in Figure 7.6, there was a strong push up to bar 20 and, as the market began to pull back, traders were looking for a buy setup, since the odds favored at least a test of the high after such a strong bull spike. However, the market never broke above the micro channel down to bar 22, and instead broke to the downside on bar 23. That made the move from bar 20 to bar 22 the final flag of the bull trend, even though it never had a bull breakout. Once the large bar 23 bear trend bar formed, the bulls gave up on their belief that there should be at least one more push up, and instead looked for at least a measured move down, based on the height of the flag. Bears also saw the bear breakout and expected the same thing. Since there was no one to buy for the next several points on the downside, the market fell quickly into the close. As the market fell, the absence of pullbacks triggered momentum sell programs, contributing to the strength of the sell-off.
Once a strong bull spike has a bar with a big tail on the top or a bear body, traders usually can buy the close for one final scalp before the market corrects. The bar before bar 20 had a large tail on the top, and astute traders wondered if it was a sign that the market might soon pull back. Since bar 20 was also the third push up from the bar 14 low, traders suspected that it could have been a climactic top. However, if the market had created a reasonable buy setup during the pullback, they would have placed buy stops above the signal bar to make sure to get long. The market never traded above the high of any prior bar, and a bull who wanted to enter on a buy stop above the high of the prior bar never got stopped into a long.


Bars 15, 17, and 20 formed a parabolic wedge top, which is a type of buy climax.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.7** Small Final Flag and Big Reversal*


> Small final flags can set up opening reversals. In Figure 7.7, bar 3 was a huge bear trend bar that followed three other strong bear trend bars after the market gapped above the bear trend line. The bar 2 breakout above the bear channel failed.
Bar 4 was the setup for a short off a small bear flag. Given the climactic behavior of the market to this point and yesterday’s trend line break, traders were looking for this to be a final flag that would lead to a reversal up after a test of the bar 1 bear low.


Bar 5 was another huge bear trend bar and bar 6 was an ii long entry, with the expectation of a rally that would last at least 10 bars and have at least two legs up. Bar 5 had about 105,000 contracts, which is about 10 times greater than the average volume or recent quiet bars, and therefore was supportive of a possible consecutive sell climax bottom. The second leg ended at bar 9 on the following day. The strength of the downward momentum demonstrated by the large bear trend bars would usually result in traders pushing the market down for a test of the low within a day or two. Although it is not shown, the bar 9 high led to a sell-off later that day that went far below the bar 5 low. Traders look for consecutive sell climaxes as opportunities to buy. Many bears bought back their shorts around the close of bar 5, and aggressive bulls went long. Others bought as bar 6 broke out above the bull ii pattern, expecting the second attempt to reverse up from yesterday’s low to be a possible low of the day. They might have risked as many ticks as bar 5 was tall, or maybe two or three points. Their profit targets included the bar 5 high, a test of the moving average, a measured move up based on the height of bar 5, and a new high of the day.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.8** Two-Bar Final Flag*


> A one- or two-bar final flag can lead to a big reversal, even after a strong bull spike. This is more likely on the open, when sharp reversals are common. In Figure 7.8, bar 3 was a two-bar pullback after a huge and possibly climactic bull trend bar, and therefore it was a possible final flag.
Bar 4 was an ii setup for a final flag short that was likely to lead to a two-legged, protracted correction, which it did. The bar 3 bull flag turned out to be the final flag, and its breakout failed and reversed down after bar 4. Note that the second bar of the ii pattern had a bear close, which is always desirable when a trader is looking to short.


The strong momentum up to the bar 4 high made traders drive the market up to test the trend extreme later in the day.


Bars 3 to 5 evolved into a larger wedge-shaped bull flag where bar 3 was the first push down and bar 5 was the third. The second push down was three bars before bar 5. This became a final flag when the market reversed down at the bar 6 lower high.


The rally to bar 6 was a wedge bear flag and lower high major trend reversal, where the bar before bar 5 was the first push up.


Bar 7 reversed up from an inside bar, and that bar was the final flag of the sell-off.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.9** Small Final Flags Commonly Evolve into Larger Final Flags*


> As shown in Figure 7.9, bar 2 was a successful short scalp from the breakout of the one-bar final flag that preceded it. The pattern then grew into a larger wedge bear flag (another final flag) that ended at bar 3. The first leg up was the top of the first small final flag, which was the bull inside bar before bar 2. The second leg up was the large inside bar after bar 2. There was a small tail on the top of the bull bar, and the next bar had a smaller body. That tail and the smaller bar created the pause from the initial move up from the bar 2 low to the top of the bull bar after bar 2. The final push up was to bar 3. This was probably more clearly a wedge on a smaller time frame chart, but can be inferred from what was present here. Other traders saw this as simply a low 2 short where bar 2 was the low 1 entry bar.
The market reversed up at bar 4 and the pattern grew into a larger wedge bear flag that ended at bar 6. The first push up was to bar 3, and the next two legs up ended at bar 5 (or the swing high after it) and bar 6. Other traders saw bar 5 as the first push up and bar 6 as the third. The small spike and channel up that ended at bar 5 had two small legs, and the rally up to bar 6 after bar 5 had two clearer legs.


The breakout of the bear wedge resulted in a successful scalp, but not a new swing low. This bar 7 higher low major trend reversal was tested by bar 8, which formed a double bottom bull flag and a second entry for the higher low major trend reversal. The rally that followed created a larger bear wedge that ended at bar 9. The first two legs up were the bars 3 and 6 highs. It was irrelevant that a lower low developed at bar 4 after the first push up at bar 3, because this was a common wedge variant.


Why the insistence of seeing everything as larger and larger bear flags? Because they were there, and the market was therefore telling traders that it had not reversed into a strong bull trend. The bulls failed in their breakout attempt above the bar 8 double bottom bull flag and head and shoulders bottom. The market reversed down at the bar 9 top of the channel that followed this spike up, and the failure was also from just above the trend channel line from bar 3 to bar 6. This head and shoulders bottom did what most head and shoulders bottoms do. It became a bear flag (this one was slightly sloping up so it was more of a wedge than a triangle) and a continuation pattern, instead of a reversal pattern. The market broke below the bar 4 low on the next day.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.10** Final Flags Do Not Have to Break Out in the With-Trend Direction*


> As shown in Figure 7.10, after the gap up and strong bull spike up to bar 5, traders were uncertain if there was going to be an opening reversal down and a high of the day or a high 1 bull flag and then a bull channel. They watched carefully as the market pulled back from the bar 5 high. From bar 5 to bar 6, traders thought that the market might be forming a bull flag. However, bar 7 was a large bear trend bar that closed on its low and below the bottom of the bar 4 large bull trend bar. Bar 7 closed many ticks below the bar before it and therefore was an attempt to form a breakaway gap. Many traders shorted as soon as it closed and put a stop above its high, expecting that the market was flipping to always-in short and would likely have good follow-through selling. Bar 5 might have been the high of the day, and if the market fell below the bar 3 low of the day, it might have a measured move down. Most traders at this point believed that bar 5 was a good candidate for a high of the day. The follow-through over the next several bars convinced traders that the market was now always-in short. They were looking for a breakout below the bar 3 bottom of the opening range and then about a measured move down. Bar 14 was an exact measured move down from the opening range breakout, and many bears took profits there.
Since traders saw bar 5 to bar 6 as a bull flag, it was the final flag of the rally, even though there was never an upside breakout.


Bar 16 was a double bottom or slightly lower low major trend reversal, but was followed by a trading range instead of a bull trend. Major trend reversals are more often followed by trading ranges instead of trends in the opposite direction.


*📊 **FIGURE 7.11** Small Final Flags after Climaxes*


> The monthly chart of the Dow Jones Industrial Average shown in Figure 7.11 had many one- and two-bar final flags after climaxes. Some led to reversals, like at bars 8, 12, 16, and 19 (the thumbnails show close-ups of bars 12 and 19), whereas others led to pullbacks, like bars 5, 10 (the left-hand thumbnail shows a close-up), 13, and 21. Some ended up as just ordinary flags and not the final flags in the move, like bars 4, 15, and 23, and some triggered but failed to reverse the market and became pullbacks in the trend (bars 13 and 21 are examples of failed final flags, because the market reversed down after the flags, but the reversals failed and the bull trends resumed at bars 14 and 23). Once there is a climax, then a brief flag, and then a breakout of that flag, the breakout is often strong enough to be another climax. Consecutive climaxes are prone to be followed by a reversal that can last about 10 bars and have about two legs. When they occur at a significant support or resistance level, they can lead to strong reversals, like at bar 20. As the market was breaking below bar 19, I told many friends that it could lead to a strong bull reversal because there was a 20-year-long bull trend line just below the bar 18 bear low. There was also the support of the bar 11 low, which led to a double bottom bull flag. Traders are aware of a possible lower high at bar 25, which many would see as the right shoulder of a potential head and shoulders top. I have been telling friends for the past couple of months that bar 24 could be the final flag of the rally. If so, the reversal should last for about 10 bars (10 months) and have at least two legs. It should find support at either the bar 22 high, the bar 23 low, the moving average (not shown), or the bar 20 low.